---
layout: post
title:  Xtext 2.37.0 Release Notes
date:   2024-11-25
categories: releasenotes
published: false
---

Xtext 2.37.0 ...

## Call to Action: Secure the future maintenance of Xtext

As you might have recognized, the number of people contributing to Xtext on a regular basis has declined over the past years and so has the number of contributions. At the same time the amount of work for basic maintenance has stayed the same or even increased with the new release cadence of Java and the Eclipse simultaneous release. Briefly: The future maintenance of Xtext is at risk, at least in the current form and as part of the Eclipse Simrel. If you care, please join the discussion in [https://github.com/eclipse/xtext/issues/1721](https://github.com/eclipse/xtext/issues/1721).

## Relevant changes

- We introduced a new bundle, `org.eclipse.xtext.xtext.generator.dependencies`, meant to be used in the `build.properties` of the DSL project in `additional.bundles`; this is meant to replace all the listed dependencies our wizard used to generate for `additional.bundles`.
The project wizard has been updated accordingly. For existing projects, you should replace all the dependencies in `additional.bundles` with this single dependency.
This bundle is only meant to be used in the DSL plug-in project, as an "additional bundle", to be able to run the MWE2 workflow and to let the MWE2 Eclipse editor find all the needed types.
- `EcoreUtil2` now provides `getAllContentsOfType(Resource, Class)`.

## Breaking changes

- We fixed a typo in the code-minings part: `CodeMinding` has been corrected to `CodeMining`. The wrong string was used to generate the configuration method in the abstract UI module, which is now correct: `configureCodeMining`. The wrong string appeared also in the `Names.named` for injection. Re-generating the language should update your DSL to the correct version. If you used to manually inject with `Names.named("codeMinding")`, you have to manually modify that to `Names.named("codeMining")`.

## Upgrades

## Deprecations

- `Exceptions.addSuppressed` is deprecated now and will be removed with the next Xtext release.

## Removals

## Credits

The Xtext project is thankful for the dedication of each committer and contributor. This release has been made possible by the following persons (in order of the number of contributed commits to this release).

TODO

## Fixed Issues

As in every release cycle we were eagerly hunting down bugs, and reviewed and integrated plenty of contributions. For further details please refer to the following lists:

* [Fixed GitHub issues](https://github.com/search?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3ARelease_2.37+is%3Aclosed+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-core+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-lib+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-extras+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-eclipse+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-idea+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-web+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-maven+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-xtend&type=Issues&ref=searchresults)

* [Closed Pull Requests](https://github.com/search?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Apr+milestone%3ARelease_2.37+is%3Aclosed+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-core+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-lib+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-extras+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-eclipse+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-idea+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-web+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-maven+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-xtend&type=Issues&ref=searchresults)

* [Fixed Eclipse Bugzilla tickets](https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/buglist.cgi?bug_status=RESOLVED&bug_status=VERIFIED&bug_status=CLOSED&classification=Modeling&classification=Tools&columnlist=product%2Ccomponent%2Cassigned_to%2Cbug_status%2Cresolution%2Cshort_desc%2Cchangeddate%2Ckeywords&f0=OP&f1=OP&f3=CP&f4=CP&known_name=Xtext%202.31&list_id=16618269&product=TMF&product=Xtend&query_based_on=Xtext%202.31&query_format=advanced&status_whiteboard=v2.37&status_whiteboard_type=allwordssubstr)
