---
layout: post
title:  Xtext 2.35.0 Release Notes
date:   2024-05-28
categories: releasenotes
published: false
---

Xtext 2.35.0 ...

## Call to Action: Secure the future maintenance of Xtext

As you might have recognized, the number of people contributing to Xtext on a regular basis has declined over the past years and so has the number of contributions. At the same time the amount of work for basic maintenance has stayed the same or even increased with the new release cadence of Java and the Eclipse simultaneous release. Briefly: The future maintenance of Xtext is at risk, at least in the current form and as part of the Eclipse Simrel. If you care, please join the discussion in [https://github.com/eclipse/xtext/issues/1721](https://github.com/eclipse/xtext/issues/1721).

## Relevant changes

### Initial support for Java 21

IMPORTANT: before switching to Java 21, make sure to go through the deprecation notice below about `org.eclipse.xtext.xbase.lib.IterableExtensions.last(Iterable<T>)`.

In Eclipse, using a recent JDT version, Xbase languages, including Xtend, can access Java 21 generated byte-code and refer to Java records.

For Maven/Tycho builds, e.g., `xtext-maven-plugin` and `xtend-maven-plugin`, a new version of `jdt.core`, e.g., 3.37.0, must be forced (currently, in the BOM, we still use an older version of JDT).
This can be achieved by passing the system property `-Djava-21` when running Maven (our BOM will automatically activate the new version of JDT).
Alternatively, you can place the line `-Djava-21` in your `.mvn/maven.config` file in the root folder.

For Gradle, you need to force the dependency of the new version of `jdt.core`, e.g., 3.37.0.

### Normalization of EOLs in Xbase multi-line strings

In Xbase languages (including Xtend), multi-line strings (that is, strings that span several lines, NOT Xtend template expressions) are now normalized concerning end-of-line characters, following the same strategies of [Normalization Of Line Terminators in Java Text Blocks](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/text-blocks/index.html#normalization-of-line-terminators): Windows CR in the DSL textual sources will not be part of the string in the generated Java code, which will only contain Unix LF.
This change leads to the same Java code generated in Windows and Unix-like systems (see issue https://github.com/eclipse/xtext/issues/2293).

This DSL string

```xtend
var s = "a multi
line string"
```

Will always result in the following generated Java code in Windows, Linux, and macOS:

```java
String s = "a multi\nline string";
```

While before, in Windows, it would have been:

```java
String s = "a multi\r\nline string";
```

Note that the behavior for explicit escape sequences (`\\r`) will remain the same as before.

### Automatic validation for Xbase languages

The new `JvmGenericTypeValidator` was introduced to automatically perform several Java-related checks in the hierarchy of the inferred `JvmGenericType`s of an Xbase language, with the corresponding error reporting.
For example, cycles in a hierarchy, extension of a final class, proper extension of an abstract class (do you implement all the abstract methods or declare the inferred class as abstract?), proper method overriding, etc. It also performs duplicate elements checks, like duplicate parameter names, duplicate fields and duplicate methods (keeping the type-erasure into consideration when using types with arguments).

This mechanism assumes that you implement the `JvmModelInferrer` "correctly".
It only checks the first inferred `JvmGenericType` for the same DSL element (i.e., if for an element `Entity` you infer two `JvmGenericType`s, `t1` and `t2`, only the first one will be checked).
Moreover, it only checks Jvm model elements with an associated source element.
Concerning intended classes to extend and interfaces to extend/implement, it assumes the model inferrer uses the new `JvmTypesBuilder#setSuperClass(JvmDeclaredType, JvmTypeReference)` and `JvmTypesBuilder#addSuperInterface(JvmDeclaredType, JvmTypeReference)`, respectively.

Currently, this validator must be enabled explicitly through the `composedCheck` in the MWE2 file or the `@ComposedChecks` annotation in the validator, e.g., `@ComposedChecks(validators = JvmGenericTypeValidator.class)`.
 
The Domainmodel example now uses this validator.
The Xtend validator has been refactored to also use this validator.

### Maven building

When using `xtext-maven-plugin` for Xbase languages, relative paths (instead of absolute paths) are now generated in the `._trace` files.

The configuration option `writeStorageResources` has been added to `xtext-maven-plugin` to write the semantic model, the resource description, and optionally the node model to a ResourceStorage (`.bin` files).
See [this integration test](https://github.com/eclipse/xtext/tree/main/org.eclipse.xtext.maven.plugin/src/test/resources/it/generate/simple-lang-write-storage-resources) for an example.

### Runtime Testing

The `AbstractFormatterTest` base class has been added to the `org.eclipse.xtext.testing` package to provide a convenient way to test the formatter capabilities. The Xtext Domainmodel example project and the Xtend code base have been extended by concrete formatter test cases to demonstrate the usage of this framework class.

The generated `InjectorProvider` for runtime tests has been improved to make customizations easier w.r.t. OSGI/Maven environments (see [https://github.com/eclipse/xtext/pull/3042](https://github.com/eclipse/xtext/pull/3042)).

The base class `AbstractXtextTests`, for "old"-style testing, is now part of `org.eclipse.xtext.testing`. (See also the removal notice below.)

Two new methods were added `org.eclipse.xtext.xbase.testing.CompilationTestHelper.Result.assertNoErrors()`/`assertNoIssues()` for checking whether during the compilation of the input sources errors, respectively, errors or warnings, were detected.

### UI Testing

The `AbstractContentAssistTest` class has been extended by API methods to provide a convenient way to test proposals from several resources. The `StatemachineContentAssistTest` test class of the Xtext Statemachine example project demonstrates the usage of these new API methods.

## Upgrades

* GSON is now on 2.11
* Guava was update to 33.2
* lsp4j is now on 0.23.x
* MWE(2) is now on 1.12/2.18

## Deprecations

The method `org.eclipse.xtext.xbase.lib.IterableExtensions.last(Iterable<T>)` has been deprecated in favor of the new `org.eclipse.xtext.xbase.lib.IterableExtensions.lastOrNull(Iterable<T>)`.
The reason is that Java 21 introduces the `getLast` method in a few collection classes.
Xbase will prefer `getLast` to our extension method `last` to generate Java code when the runtime is Java 21 and the `last` extension method is used in an Xbase DSL code, e.g., Xtend.
The problem is that our extension method `last` returns null when the collection is empty, while the `getLast` method in Java 21 throws a `NoSuchElementException`, leading to different semantics.

We encourage everyone to pay attention to such deprecations and switch to the new `lastOrNull`, which retains the semantics of `last`, **before** switching to Java 21.
To keep the consistency between `IterableExtensions` and `IteratorExtensions` we also deprecated `last` in the latter and introduced `lastOrNull` in `IteratorExtensions`.

## Future removals notice

In the next release, 2.36.0, the long time deprecated `org.eclipse.xtext.junit4` and `org.eclipse.xtext.xbase.junit` will be removed.
The projects `org.eclipse.xtext.testing`, `org.eclipse.xtext.ui.testing`, `org.eclipse.xtext.xbase.testing` and `org.eclipse.xtext.xbase.ui.testing` already provide replacements for the above deprecated projects.
Note that the old base class `AbstractXtextTests` is now part of `org.eclipse.xtext.testing`.

## Credits

The Xtext project is thankful for the dedication of each committer and contributor. This release has been made possible by the following persons (in order of the number of contributed commits to this release).

- Lorenzo Bettini
- Christian Dietrich
- Sebastian Zarnekow
- Hannes Wellmann
- Tamas Miklossy 
- Ed Merks
- Rubén Porras Campo
- Didier Vojtisek
- Ehab Younes
- Florian Pirchner

## Fixed Issues

As in every release cycle we were eagerly hunting down bugs, and reviewed and integrated plenty of contributions. For further details please refer to the following lists:

* [Fixed GitHub issues](https://github.com/search?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3ARelease_2.35+is%3Aclosed+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-core+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-lib+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-extras+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-eclipse+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-idea+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-web+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-maven+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-xtend&type=Issues&ref=searchresults)

* [Closed Pull Requests](https://github.com/search?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Apr+milestone%3ARelease_2.35+is%3Aclosed+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-core+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-lib+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-extras+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-eclipse+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-idea+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-web+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-maven+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-xtend&type=Issues&ref=searchresults)

* [Fixed Eclipse Bugzilla tickets](https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/buglist.cgi?bug_status=RESOLVED&bug_status=VERIFIED&bug_status=CLOSED&classification=Modeling&classification=Tools&columnlist=product%2Ccomponent%2Cassigned_to%2Cbug_status%2Cresolution%2Cshort_desc%2Cchangeddate%2Ckeywords&f0=OP&f1=OP&f3=CP&f4=CP&known_name=Xtext%202.31&list_id=16618269&product=TMF&product=Xtend&query_based_on=Xtext%202.31&query_format=advanced&status_whiteboard=v2.35&status_whiteboard_type=allwordssubstr)
